Electronic Commerce
Unit-1
History of E-commerce
Most of us have shopped online for something at some point, which means we've taken part in
e-commerce. So it goes without saying that e-commerce is everywhere. But very few people
may know that e-commerce has a history that goes back to before the internet began.
E-commerce actually goes back to the 1960s when companies used an electronic system called
the Electronic Data Interchange to facilitate the transfer of documents. It wasn't until 1994 that
the very first transaction took place. This involved the sale of a CD between friends through an
online retail website called Net Market.
The industry has gone through so many changes since then, resulting in a great deal of
evolution. Traditional brick-and-mortar retailers were forced to embrace new technology in
order to stay afloat as companies like Alibaba, Amazon, eBay, and Etsy became household
names. These companies created a virtual marketplace for goods and services that consumers
can easily access.
Meaning of e-commerce
As is obvious, the term e-commerce is an abbreviated term for ‘electronic commerce’, which
refers to the process of undertaking business transactions over internet. Almost anything -
ranging from basic items such as breads or soaps, to high end expensive products such as
computers or cars and even highly specialized services such as sale of second-hand products to
purchase of property, are all available on the related e-commerce web-portals. Depending on the
products and services available, e-commerce web-portals could be understood to be ‘Generic’
and ‘Specific’. Examples of generic ecommerce portals are ‘Flip Cart’, ‘Amazon’, where one
could buy any product, ranging from furniture to flowers. On the other hand ‘Big Basket’ could
be termed as a specific e-commerce web portal as the customer can order for only grocery related
products on this web portal.
Framework of e-commerce
E-commerce frameworks are software platforms or structures that provide a foundation for
building and managing online stores and digital commerce websites. They are pre-built,
customizable solutions designed to streamline the development and deployment of ecommerce
websites, making it easier for businesses to set up and manage their online presence. By using an
e-commerce framework, businesses can save time and resources, as they don’t need to build these
functionalities from scratch.
